- Mike, welcome back to Talk Python to Me.
- Hi, how are you doing?
- It's been a while.
Hey, I'm doing really well.
How about you?
- I have a cold, but hanging in there.
- Yeah, thanks for toughing out and being here with us.
- Yeah.
When we last spoke, we did speak about SQLAlchemy,
of course, but it was in April of 2015.
That's been a while.
- Yeah, so was that live version 1.1?
- Something like that, yeah, yeah, yeah.
And that was episode five of the podcast
that's been going on for years.
- Oh, right.
- So really early days.
I appreciate you helping me kick off the show
and can you believe it's still going?
That's crazy, huh?
- Yeah, doing great.
- Yeah, thanks a lot.
- I'm glad Python's popular enough
that it can have its own podcast.
I'm pretty psyched about that.
- I'm super psyched about that as well.
Maybe, let's sort of start with that actually.
Back then Python was already popular, right?
2015, we'd already sort of hit that hockey stick
growth curve that started around 2012.
But even so, does Python's popularity and growth
and appeal surprise you these days?
- No, it doesn't surprise me.
I'm pleased that it's growing in popularity.
I think the first thing that I saw about Python
when I first got into it in the early 2000s was,
it's really clear, it's really unambiguous
compared to everything else that I've used.
And I always wanted to be involved in the language
that quote unquote regular people can get involved with
and people at a low level, high level
can do things with it.
You know, I didn't wanna be focusing on a computer language
that would only be very high level math whizzes
'cause I'm not a math person at all.
That's why I don't really do Haskell.
You know, I wanted to, there to be,
'cause I, you know, worked in different jobs
and I always would be, not always,
but often someone that was writing all the frameworks
and the architectures,
and then all the other people were using my frameworks,
but I, you know, a lot of those people
were not at the level that I was,
and I wanted to make sure that the stuff that I did
was approachable.
So Python's very approachable.
And the fact that now that the academic world
and the media news world is getting very data oriented,
surprise, they're all using Python,
which was like-- - Yeah, surprise, surprise.
- Yeah, I missed exactly what I would have expected.
And it might not have gone that way,
but it was a pretty good bet.
So it's cool that there's a data science profession now
and Python is at the center of it.
So I think that's really great.
- Yeah, it makes a lot of sense
that it's at the center of it.
I do think it has this special appeal to people.
And I think it's made up of a couple of parts.
One is it's, you can be very effective
with a partial understanding of Python.
Like you could not even understand what a class is
and you could totally meaningful stuff, right?
Which a lot of languages don't have that feature.
- Right.
- It has the packages, right?
All the, I haven't even checked.
Let me check it out.
How many packages are on PyPI these days?
338,000.
That's a few things to just grab and, you know,
- Sure. - With like Lego block style,
some of which you've contributed to up there.
So that's pretty awesome.
Some of the popular ones.
Yeah, I think it's fantastic.
So good to see people continuing to embrace it.
And you mentioned making it more accessible, right?
Like there's different things of accessibility.
There's, well, I can write for loops
and do a list comprehension
and that's pretty easy to understand.
There's another, like I need to talk to a Postgres cluster
and make it do things, right?
It doesn't matter how simple Python is.
When you talk to external systems,
you to some degree take on the complexity
of that external system, right?
And I do think ORMs and in the NoSQL world, ODMs,
if you will, really democratize that as well.
You can write the code in the language you already know,
and it does the database stuff,
including the slight mismatch of language features
in SQL like @parameter name versus question mark
type of variations, right?
- Yeah.
What's interesting, that particular variation
is not even necessary.
That's a quirk of the Python DB API
that they decided to have different parameter styles.
So yeah, we wanted to make it so you wouldn't have
to worry about that.
So yes, as far as democratizing,
SQLAlchemy was always aiming to democratize
as much as it could to make things
that are trivial and you shouldn't have to worry about
like question marks versus colon name.
You don't have to worry about that stuff.
But at the same time, I always came from
all these different database shops
where we had to use every feature possible.
And it's always about exposing the database,
the SQL, SQLAlchemy remains pretty different
than most tools, any tool I've seen in Python, more or less.
Probably tools in other languages that is not trying
to create this abstracted way, you can't really know that there's some vaguely relational
object store thing.
It's like we really want you to be into SQL and you just happen to be able to write it
in terms of Python constructs, but you can also write SQL strings.
We're going to try to get that to have as much flexibility as possible.
And yeah.
Yeah, that's one of the...
There's a couple of interesting philosophies
around SQLAlchemy or philosophies of SQLAlchemy
that you've imbued upon it.
And one of them is not to hide the database, right?
Because you often end up in this leaky abstraction
where it's like, "Oh, you can just forget there's no database.
Oh, wait, is it too slow?
Well, now you're into some weird world where it's not a great fit, right?"
So maybe we could talk a bit about the philosophies
a bit before we get into what's new and where things are going.
Yeah, well, the basic philosophy has always been, and I think some years into it, I read
some articles that gave me some better terminology.
One of automation, of working with a SQL database.
Like if you're going to write an application that talks to a database and you're going
to have 20 tables, and say you're not using any ORM, you're just going to write, write
the raw SQL, you're going to find yourself writing the same insert statement, typing
it out over and over again.
I know that my table has these 10 columns.
I'm going to type this insert statement.
That's what we call boilerplate, right?
Any program that anyone writes using nothing at all,
they're going to write some function
to generate that insert statement, right?
People usually talk about select statements
as the ones they want to have more control over.
But there's just the boring ones.
There's updates, inserts, and deletes,
which are really boring.
There's all the DDL for creating tables and stuff
that's very redundant.
Like, nobody needs to--
Like if you want to learn how to do that stuff, you should learn how to do this stuff.
But if you have 100 classes, you don't want to type in 100 create table statements.
You don't want to have to do that. It should be automated.
So the idea is that when you're working in this automated environment, you still know everything that's, you know, what a create table statement is, you know what an insert is, you know what CRUD somewhat is, you know, you know, SQL, you know, you would know it, ideally, not necessarily, but ideally, you would know how to write this whole program without using anything like you would know how to use raw SQL.
Right. I would say probably a good rule of thumb for I've studied enough SQL
to feel like I'm not hiding too much from myself by using an ORM
would be if you could get the ORM to print out its statement.
So in SQL, I can be on the engine if you set echo equals true, for example.
And you know what it does when you read the statements.
You're like, okay, I'm not sure I would have exactly seemed to write the join that way,
but okay, that makes sense.
I see why it's been, I see what this update statement,
these parameters mean.
Okay, like now let's just, let's be productive, right?
What do you think about that as a rule?
- Echo equals true, right?
Was when I first wrote SQL,
whatever I did for the first two weeks,
echo equals true was right there.
That was like the very first thing,
like you will see the SQL.
'Cause I had come from using,
I think I'd probably use Hibernate for a while for Java.
Now it's 20 years later or 25,
what, you know, hibernate, I'm sure it's very different, but at that time,
I don't know how to see what the heck it was sending to the database.
I had no idea.
I mean, I'm sure there was a way to do it, but it wasn't like obvious.
It was like, you have to set up lockers and this and that and job at this and job
at that.
And the idea with hibernate and other, it was like, well, you shouldn't have to
know that we do the SQL for you.
Why should you know that?
Like, and like, no, use this correctly.
And we'll solve the problem.
Right.
I want a really one-to-one thing where you're writing this Python select dot where dot whatever
and it's like what you can one-to-one.
I mean if I had more videography skills and also a lot of time, I'd make some kind of
cartoon that shows boom boom how it lines up at the statement.
It's not meant to hide anything.
It's meant to automate.
So like if you had, I always use this term, the idea of a soda bottle company, like a
soda company, like you're selling soda.
Soda's not good for you.
But if you had to bottle 4,000 bottles of soda,
you would use a machine to do it.
It's not to say that you don't know how to pour soda
into a bottle yourself, but you need to scale it up.
It's about scaling up something that is very repetitive
to be typing by hand.
- And be consistent and repetitive and whatnot.
- Yep. - Absolutely, absolutely.
A couple comments from the audience real quick,
I just wanna throw out there.
D Varazzo says, "Hello from--"
- Daniel, yeah.
- Yeah, from PsychoPG, thank you for your kind wrapping
and Jay Lee is just cheerleading for Python.
It's awesome.
Awesome, hello everyone out there.
So yeah, I think this is really a powerful thing
to think about, just the reproducibility
and also in terms of linking into the tooling.
I think one thing people often miss about the advantages
because sometimes you'll hear people say,
you should never use an ORM,
It's hiding too much from you.
- Yeah, sure.
- Yeah, sure, go.
I'm gonna go do something.
You keep working on your strings.
So one of the things I can see
that sometimes can easily get missed
is refactoring tools, error checking.
If you write some kind of select statement on a class
and you wanna change that field or that column,
you change the field,
which obviously maps over to the column,
but that also changes your entire code
if you're using a proper editor that understands refactoring,
like VS Code or PyCharm or something like that, right?
- Yep.
Yeah, so a big thing with refactoring,
and one of the things that we had to adapt to as it came
was PEP 44, which is, I call it mypy, but it's not mypy.
mypy is a tool that checks Python annotations,
and we call it the mypy thing, but it's really PEP 44,
which is that new thing where they're trying to have
kind of a layer of typing, like a strongly typed,
static typed, sorry, statically typed layer
on top of your Python script.
So if you're a library in Python,
you have to work with the system now
'cause people expect it.
And the IDEs, I use VS Code now with,
so I keep forgetting the name of the engine,
but that's the PyFlakes, not PyFlakes.
You know what it is?
- Yeah. - Pylance.
I can never remember that name, Pylance.
Pylance, think of a lance.
Pylance.
Pylance uses the annotations a lot.
So, and I actually am seeing where it works
and where it doesn't work.
And I think the refactoring tools are greatly improved
by the fact that there is this concept
of static type annotations.
- Yeah.
- I think there's a lot of shortcomings in PEP44.
There's a lot of things that's like,
it's not great.
You know, I'm not a hundred percent optimistic on it,
but I definitely it's way better than nothing.
And there's some also some features that are coming
that are in in peps that have not been implemented.
This is thing called variadic types that would allow us
to actually be able to type your results
that coming back if you give it a select,
we'll know the types in your result row.
- I see, is that something like a generic or template type?
- It's a generic that works like the tuple type
'cause you might notice in PEP 44,
you can't make your own tuple type.
The typing that's applied to tuple is actually,
if you look at the mypy source, it's hard coded.
If equals tuple, then all these new special things.
So things like that, they need to fix.
Yeah, 'cause rows from a database are essentially tuples.
- Right.
- So that's how we wanna type them.
- I do have a question,
since we're talking about the typing.
I pulled up this super simple example here
off of the SQLAlchemy documentation.
It doesn't really matter.
It's just a class that drives from declare to base,
has a table name, and then it has the stuff
that people probably know from many ORMs.
These descriptors, right?
So id equals a column, which is of type integer,
primary key equals true, name equals column,
which is a string, and so on.
I'm gonna tell you what I've been doing
with this stuff lately,
and you tell me whether this is a good idea
or a bad idea or whatever.
So what I've been doing is I've been writing this code
as like this name one.
I would say name colon string equals column string.
So the Python code believes it's the type
that's backed by the database, the column type.
So name is a string, ID colon int,
even though it's really set to a descriptor
of column integer primary equals true.
- Yeah.
- Have you seen this?
Is this a good idea?
- Yes, I have done a lot of work on this concept
and what you're doing is not incorrect,
but there's a lot of complexities to it
that require a little more going on.
You mentioned--
- To be clear, I'm not doing this for mypy,
I'm doing this just so my editor is more--
- Sure, yes, but also, yes, for the editor,
I don't have the link handy,
I'd have to go searching on my computer,
but there's actually, so first of all,
we do have a mypy plugin where you are able
to use annotations like name colon string,
and it will automatically kind of work them
into the correct kind of thing to be recognized
also at the query level.
It doesn't work with PyLance.
And I have a new approach that I worked out
with some other people for PyLance type stuff
where we won't need a plugin,
where you will be able to make,
we're not totally sure how we want to do it.
The point is that you would say name colon,
you wouldn't say str,
you would use this other construct called mapping,
or maps rather, and maps,
and then the map type is str.
The reason you do that is because
If you use the user class in a query, not as an instance,
it also has behaviors at the class level.
- Right, like .desc for descending.
- Yeah, like that kind of stuff.
Right, so I'm trying to work out the best way to do this
where you're not typing the same,
you're not repeating yourself,
'cause right now it's a little bit squirrely.
The class works completely in PyLance,
everything that's expected both at the class level
and at the instance level will work out.
It probably requires that when you do the declarative class,
you would use a slightly different API.
The current proposal is instead of using uppercase column,
it's this new thing called m.column.
We can always change the name and how it looks.
One of the flaws with that declarative model
you see there is that when I came up
with that declarative idea many years ago,
Those column objects are not Python descriptor compatible at all.
They actually get replaced when you map the class.
It's totally a...
- Okay.
- Like a seal.
It's not that clean.
So I have ideas to make declarative cleaner, you know, and do more of what it's
supposed to do without kind of breaking the rules.
That's the thing about Python is that as the years have gone by, everyone,
even newcomers, we're all much more into not...into being clean about code and being
more verbose and typing is more verbose
and async I/O is more verbose.
You know, when we were doing Python in '06, '07,
everything was like, done, just magic object, boom,
magic object, like nobody wanted to type anything.
Now, you know, which was bad, you know,
we didn't totally do it 'cause it was scripting language,
but nowadays people are way more tolerant
of more verbosity, more clarity.
And I'm trying to keep SQLAlchemy and my MA team,
we're trying to keep it going along with that.
So the PEP 44 thing, 44, the async.io stuff.
That's my knowledge dump for the typing thing.
- No, that's fantastic.
- It's a work in progress.
Yeah.
- Do you think that people, I have some thoughts on this,
but do you think that people are more willing to accept
like a little more structure in the code now
because of the tooling is more there to help you write it?
Like the auto, like I write my maybe C tab.
I don't write column of whatever, right?
- Right.
Maybe it's the tooling, because nowadays people use Python data classes,
and they want to use Python.
We have some support for Python data classes now.
And the syntaxes that they want me to implement, which we've done, are pretty
verbose, because they want to have a data class where you have all your data class
fields, and then within the field, they want to have the mapping information.
And people are like, "This is awesome."
And I'm like, "Great."
'cause like it's actually more verbose than I would prefer,
but like people are way more tolerant of that.
So yeah, I guess their IDEs are spitting things out
or just people.
- Yeah.
- The values are different now.
- Kids these days.
So is the goal with the data classes
to try to have a more pure entity model
that doesn't have like column information
and key index information
and just there's some other layer that puts those together?
What's this?
I haven't really played with that aspect.
- Data classes, I haven't really had the Kool-Aid
with the data classes yet.
I think the idea is that it's this very clean
data encapsulating object that has kind of prefab
constructors and reaper and validation maybe.
- It does have that kind of stuff, that's right, comparison.
- Yeah, I might be thinking of Pydantic.
I mean, Pydantic kind of takes it a little further.
It's kind of some murky stuff between data classes,
Pydantic and Tcl.
I mean--
- Yeah, they blend together in my mind a little as well.
- It's all weird, yeah.
And there's a new product called SQL model
that seems to be pretty popular in that regard.
- Yeah, built on SQLAlchemy.
- Yeah, yeah, which is great.
It's totally awesome.
It's actually a more opinionated overlay of the ORM
which is also, it's also using Python.
So that's good.
Yeah, the thing you've got on the screen there
is another way of, yeah, that's called imperative table.
but it also has the mapper registry.mapped on it,
which is interesting, has some of it.
It's table metadata has like not just the table name,
but all the column information as well.
It's interesting, it does have the same type declaration
that I was trying to impose
upon the traditional SQLAlchemy models.
- Yeah, that's one form of the data class model.
If you scroll down, the more inline embedded one is there.
Let me see if that's what it is.
Yeah, that's the one that's even crazier,
which you have the data class fields.
So you're fully data, you're fully a data class as far as what's your ID sees.
But then you have the SQLAlchemy mapping stuff inside.
So all of this is, you know, we'll, it'll time will tell which approach becomes.
The popular one or people just use SQL model because the people that like data
classes are tend to be using SQL model and pydantic anyway, and maybe they'll
just, they'll be there.
I don't really know.
- Yeah, I'm gonna talk to Sebastian Ramirez,
maybe in December or January about SQL model.
- Yeah.
- SQL model is interesting
because it basically takes Pydantic models
and SQLAlchemy and merges them together.
And Sebastian has a good feel
for what a nice API looks like.
So I'm optimistic for this.
I haven't done anything with it,
but it does look pretty neat.
- What he had to do was he had to modify
Pydantic's base class.
'Cause when I first looked, maybe like in this last past year
about how Pydantic do SQLAlchemy
without having two separate models,
I was like, okay, this base class has got a whole thing,
a lot of things going on that don't work
with Python descriptors, so it'd have to change.
And I think Sebastian did that, basically.
He went in and changed how the init works
so that it's compatible and more power to it.
- Yeah, more power to it, awesome.
- I have enough to work on.
I can't, this is like too much for me
to also work on Pydantic,
So I'm glad someone else did it.
- Yeah, absolutely, absolutely.
One more philosophy thing, that is not it, this is the one.
One more philosophy thing that I want to ask about,
or let you just speak to,
because this is a key element of how SQLAlchemy works.
There's other ORMs that work this way.
And then there's also this one, I think it's called Django.
People might've used the Django ORM before.
No, that one is more of a traditional
Ruby on Rails Active Record,
I have a thing and I call save on it.
- Sure.
- You went with this thing called unit of work,
which is a little more transactional,
like I'm gonna do a bunch of stuff and then all together.
- Yeah. - It happens.
Maybe just speak to that real quick before we talk about it.
- Well, when I was gonna do SQLAlchemy,
the main thing that I had worked on a lot at work
was a lot of fancy selects.
I hadn't done much work with the persistent side,
but I read this book by Martin Fowler
called "Patterns of Enterprise Architecture."
- I read it as well.
It was quite an interesting book back then, yeah.
And I had actually never, even though I had used Hibernate,
I had never heard of unit of work.
And I was like, wow, that looks cool.
I'm gonna write that.
Because one of the philosophies was like,
insert update deletes are really, really boring.
And even saying object that's saved is really boring.
I was working on a content management system
for Major League Baseball.
And when you work with CMSs,
you have a lot of tree-based hierarchical structures
with lots of self-referential stuff.
when you persist self-referential structures in a database with auto-incorporated primary keys,
you've got to get one row, get the primary key back, put it there,
put it then everything's going to be done in a very specific order.
Yeah, yeah. Like I tried to call save on this, but that didn't work
because I need to call save first there and it's like, ah, this is crazy, right?
Right. So it's like, why would I want to do, I shouldn't have to do that either.
I should just have this thing like, here's everything in the transaction, just push it.
And it, you know, took a very, very long time to get it right.
It has a couple of little chinks in the armor,
a couple of cases that you might have to drop it
to call it flush explicitly,
but we never get bugs with the unit of work stuff.
I had, if you look at unit of work.py,
it hasn't changed in years.
- Yeah.
- I mean, it took a long, long time in the beginning,
and then I rewrote it a few times
and we found it was really, really bad early on.
It was very hard to get it right for the stuff.
- Yeah, a lot of edge cases, right?
I can imagine.
People can do at least six months of thinking
and then you have to make it right.
- Mostly that we support
these joint table inheritance models
were very hard for me to get my head around
how to persist that.
And then it just took a long time
'cause it kind of grew organically.
You know you're coding, you know what you're doing.
- Yeah, well, I'm glad you wrote that instead of me.
So thank you.
- Yeah, I wouldn't be able to do it today.
- You gotta be deep in it, right?
Comment from Brandon Brenner.
Hey, Brandon.
Says, "I use SQL model in a demo project
"and it was so easy to use."
Very nice.
- All right, so I think probably the big news over here is 2.0.
- Yeah.
- Or as you like to put it at your recent talk, the 1.4ening.
- Right, the 1.4ening.
So, yeah, 2.0 has now the docs for it, which are very early stages, are on the site.
In the library tab is a development thing where the development docs are.
- The current release is the 1.4. - 1.4.
It has a lot of these features in there already, right?
Yes, all of the... just about everything in SQL 2.0 internally is available in 1.4.
We did all of the internals first and added all the stuff
so that 1.4 could be a transitional release
so that all the behind-the-scenes would be getting tested
and people could use the new APIs and transition over.
Right. Is 2.0 going to drop some of the older APIs hard?
Many, yeah.
So people who have looked, 1.4 has this big migration thing where
if you're on 1.3, which is pretty common, you can go to 1.4 pretty easily without much problems.
But right, when you're on this thing, we have this whole thing
that is kind of inspired by the Python 2-3 process
and at the same time tries to not make some of them
what I thought were mistakes of the Python 2D process.
So what this is based on is that 1.4 has a environment variable
you can turn on in your console or whatever
called SQLAlchemyWarn2O, something like that.
And when you turn that on, you're in now in warnings mode.
You will get all kinds of warnings about all kinds of APIs
that either have changed or are going away or use this one or that one.
So a lot has happened. But at the same time,
the reason that's maybe not as scary as you might think is that all the APIs that are being deprecated
are APIs that I've already taken out of the docs years ago.
Like, the APIs that I've been telling people for years,
don't do that anymore. We don't, we're not gonna do that.
So it's a lot of old stuff
that is not what we feature in the docs. Like, basically, the things we're checking out too well
are things that have annoyed me for years.
And there's a few changes in 2.0 that are
a little more like boom, like we change how the engine is auto begin instead of auto commit.
But 2.0 is basically going to be, I think, better. It's in line with this whole notion of people are
appreciate more explicitness when things are clear. So 2.0 is going to remove a lot of implicit stuff,
a lot of five ways to do the same thing kind of patterns. It's going to narrow you down into
like one or two possible patterns for things.
- Yeah, that has been a thing with SQLAlchemy, right?
There's a lot of ways to accomplish stuff, yeah.
- Yeah, because I came from Perl, I can, I'm sorry.
You know, I was doing Perl.
You know, it's still the case
that there's more than one way to do things.
You can't really get away from that totally.
- Yeah, well, there's often, there's the,
I want the super simple, easy way,
just call an ORM method, and then,
oh, we gotta rewrite the select statement
is this SOAR procedure type.
There's usually a backdoor type of thing
in the database world that has to happen at some point, right?
Yeah, SOAR procedure is a pretty dramatic example.
But yeah, these days, the way it is,
is that when you write your code,
it's going to be clear where the SQL is being executed,
where the IO happens.
I mean, in many ways, it actually was inspired by asyncIO,
where I had been tweeting a lot with people into asyncIO,
which I'm a little skeptical of it.
At the same time, what people appreciate about it is that you're very aware of where
the actual message to the database is happening.
This is where the message gets sent out.
Here's where it comes back.
When you say, "Wait, now."
Yeah.
Now it's happening.
Now, I think that's a little heavy handed, but at the same time, I appreciated that notion.
So with 2.0, I tried to work with that idea that we want to make it very clear.
Here's where you're making a SQL statement. Here's where it's executing. Here's where the results are.
And then also, here's where the transaction is. And those are actually the biggest changes that
you're going to know that you're in a transaction, you're going to know when your transaction ended,
when you're going to know if you committed it, or if it just rolled back.
Yeah.
And you'll know and the code is going to be a little more verbose than SQLAlchemy and SQL.client.
But people are already writing code that way. Because now that I've seen many years of people
writing code, you know, what I really want to know when this
happens. So yeah, people don't want, they don't want excess
bells and switches that are all that that don't mean seem to
have any purpose. But there if your code is clear, it being
I basically mean being able to read the code, and the intent is
as clear as you can get it without. Well, this just does
that we just know it does that, you know, that's kind of where
I'm trying to go. And I'm somewhat freed by the fact that
that I know people are more tolerant of step A,
step B, step C.
- Sure.
- Being explicit. - A little less magic, yeah.
- Yeah, people are okay with that.
Now, they weren't okay with that 15, 12 years ago.
People are like, "That's too much typing."
So it's good.
- So I wanna talk about this migration thing,
like what a person does to go
from a 1.3 application onward.
But I think that's getting a little bit ahead of ourselves.
How about we talk a little bit about
What are the major features coming in 2.0?
- Well, first of all, obviously we're finally
to Python 3 only.
- Yeah, what is it, 3.6?
That you're, has a minimum version?
- We're gonna make it 3.7.
- 3.7, okay.
- 3.7, yeah, 3.6 is EOL, so in a month or two.
- Yeah, yeah, no point to do that.
- Yeah, just today, or I didn't merge it yet,
but we're ready to merge this gigantic Garrett review
that's going to take all the Unicode conversion crap out.
That was all Python 2.
I mean, Python 3 having native Unicode is tremendous for us
because all the DB APIs do the Unicode now.
The new APIs-- so yeah, we have this new SQL caching system
that I've talked about a bunch in some
of the talks I did recently.
Yeah, tell us about that in a little bit.
Yeah, that's in 1.4.
Is that like compiling the SQL statements
and then like caching those results?
What are we talking about here?
So when you run a SQLAlchemy statement,
we have to take your Python code and make a string out of it,
which is the string we sent to the database.
We also have to look at that thing and figure out
what kinds of results are we going to get back?
Are we going to get strings and dates and integers and floats?
And then for those strings and states and floats and whatever,
do we have to do any processing on the rows?
We want to have that all set up because if you get
10,000 rows back, you want to make all those decisions up front.
- So that we run 10,000 times. - 10,000 times.
Everything is as fast as possible.
Everything is already figured out.
When you do the ORM, that whole process becomes way more complicated.
There's way more going on. There's ego loaders,
and there's more fancy kinds of types.
We might be taking columns and putting them into an object.
All of that stuff is time-consuming,
and it all now in 1.4 lives behind what I call the cache wall,
which means when the caching is working,
which it seems to work,
it's only gonna do that stuff once
for a statement that's been cached.
So when we run your statement,
we're gonna do a process that's still a little pricey,
which is to get a cache key from what you typed.
- You gotta determine some sort of unique hash
type of thing out of it.
- Yeah, it's actually a gigantic tuple right now.
And maybe it'll be a hash in some other release.
But for now it's a giant tuple
'cause Python's pretty good at that.
It's cheaper than doing the whole compilation.
And then we get the whole compilation from a cache,
if it's there, and if it's LRU cache.
So if it's not, we make it.
And it allows us to put more bells and whistles
into the compiler.
We have this thing where it will now detect
if your statement will produce a Cartesian product,
meaning you have joins between tables
that are not linked together.
And we have all kinds of other fun things
the ORM can do that take a little more time to compile,
but now they're behind a cache.
So the performance is not really impacted too much.
And so that's exciting stuff.
And we're going to be looking into 2.0 to start using Cython
to speed this up even more.
SQLogging for many years--
yeah, SQLogging for many years has C extensions
that we wrote as C code years ago.
We're going to migrate those to Cython
so that we can more quickly add new Cythonized code
for different sections to speed up
to have those cache keys get built.
- Yeah, it's one thing to say we're gonna write
some big chunk in C layer.
It's another to say, just that loop,
could that loop be C?
- Yeah.
- And with Cython, you can kind of just do that.
- You can do that.
You can do it quicker and without having to worry
about all the memory reference counters.
You know, C code in Python is pretty tedious.
I'm not really a spectacular C programmer anyway.
Yeah, so the cache--
- So a lot of people who might want to come contribute
are probably not C developers,
they're Python developers first.
- Yeah, yeah, Cython is pretty cool.
So that is because you can really,
if you just do Python, you can do it.
It's just like a strict Python.
It's pretty neat.
And we found that some of the Cythonized versions
of the functions are actually faster than our C code.
- Really? - Strange.
- That's pretty strange.
- That's strange because Cython,
the people that did Cython optimize the crap out of it.
They know all these very esoteric Python C API things
that like literally we have,
our C code is not a lot of code.
It's like, you know, it's like a few hundred lines.
It's like, we'll call like, you know,
tuple get item or whatever it's called.
Cython has some, well, if we do this and that,
then it's faster and it actually is.
I can't give you detail on, cause I don't know,
but like we did benching and Cython
was actually faster than raw C code.
- Yeah, I remember way back when hearing,
you know, people used to say,
well, if you want it to be fast,
you have to write an assembler.
And then you can use C if it's not gonna be that fast.
- Right.
- Right?
- That's a different kind of fast.
- Right, well, what I was--
- To be clear.
- Well, turn, of course,
but to be, well, the interesting thing to me was
there was this switch when the compilers got good enough
that you probably were slower writing assembly
for most people, right?
- Yeah, right.
- And I feel like the thing you're describing here
kind of like that transformation like this, the compiler understands the whole system
better than if you were to do it yourself at the same level.
Yeah, they found, yeah, they've apparently, I don't know the specifics, but in some cases,
they've figured out ways to make it even faster.
So there's no reason to not use Cython.
You think of what people are doing with Cython, right?
They're running on supercomputers doing huge calculations that take so, they have a strong
motivation to make it a little bit faster here and there.
Yeah, I mean, right. Look, here's the thing about Python. Python is a high level scripting language. It's interpreted always. So it's already not, you know, I don't want to say that. But like, if you're really writing like, you know, high frequency trading software, you probably want to use something like Rust or something. You know, Python is not really that. It's a lot of things. But it's not like, you know, high frequency trading speed daemon type thing. It's just it's, I mean, you can't do that.
You can make it do that.
- Once you start wanting it to be sub millisecond,
you might wanna start, but other than that,
you're probably fine, yeah.
- Yeah, it's not gonna, I might be wrong,
it's not gonna control the rockets, you know,
but I guess maybe it does, I don't know.
It doesn't have to be that.
It's so useful for so much stuff that--
- Yeah, absolutely.
Okay, so that's really cool.
So you're thinking about switching some of your C code
over to Cycon, which is really interesting.
And I didn't see that one coming.
That's awesome.
The cache layer is cool.
So that way, if I call a function and in that function,
I do a query statement in the ORM,
the first time that's expensive,
the second time it's not free, but less expensive, right?
Cheapish.
- It's much, much less expensive.
- Much less, okay.
- Yeah, yeah.
What we haven't sped up yet,
and I mean, I've been speaking this for many years,
is when you fetch rows from the ORM
to create the Python objects that are your classes,
that's still more expensive than we'd like it to be.
So if you're fetching 1,000--
- That is one of the most,
yeah, that's super expensive in terms,
in ORMs and ODMs. - It is.
- If you select 10,000 rows out of a database,
it's probably the serialization or deserialization
that's the cost, right?
- Completely, completely.
And I've made the loading way, way,
like I spent years and years making it way faster
by doing that whole thing
where we precalculate everything up front.
Every loader, we're not gonna,
like every time you get a row,
it's like zip, zip, zip, zip, zip.
We have this little call we'll set up.
But still, just to make the object,
just to make a new class in Python is expensive.
It's pricey.
So still a work in progress.
But yeah, the caching will not speed that up.
It'll speed up the overhead per query.
- Sure, which is still,
like every area you can speed it up is great.
Danielle out there says,
Cython is also a great choice to forget about ref count
and PsychoPG2, it took a while to find all the--
- Totally, yeah, ref counts are tough.
Ref counts are tough.
- Yeah.
- I'm pretty proud of myself that I did figure them out
to some degree.
You know, they're not as hard as malloc and free,
but it's kind of an esoteric set of rules to ref counts.
- While we're down in the internals, let me ask you this,
if you've thought about this or experimented with this,
any, one thing, as I dug into Python's memory model,
that I found to be really interesting is when you create,
you know, you have GC, the GC module,
you can say GC get thresholds or set thresholds,
and the thresholds tell you
what will trigger a garbage collection,
not reference counting,
but a cycle detection type of thing, right?
- Yeah.
- The defaults, at least last I looked,
I haven't looked in 3.10, but in 3.9, it was 710.10,
which means 700 allocations,
and then for every 10 Gen0 collections,
there's a Gen 1 and every 10 Gen 1,
there's a Gen 2 collection.
That 700 means if you allocate more,
700 more classes or dictionaries or tuples or whatever,
then have been freed, a GC will run.
- Yeah.
- So if you select 10,000 rows out of a database,
how many GCs are running?
I mean, that's a lot, right?
That's like 14 GCs. - It depends on
what you're doing, because if you're taking the 10,000 rows
put them in a gigantic list, then it's not GCing much at all, because you're putting
it all in a gigantic buffer.
You're going to have to watch the size of your process grow.
Right.
I mean, you're not freeing any, and you're not ref-count freeing any either, but you're
allocating 700 more.
I think that might trigger 14 GCs, unless I'm understanding it wrong.
You would know.
I don't know anything about it.
I wouldn't know.
All I know about GC is that it's going to happen.
Yeah.
The reference counting stuff is super straightforward, but the GC side,
so I've always thought about this around the database,
even if you're just getting dictionaries, not ORM classes back.
Yeah.
If you're selecting a whole bunch of stuff,
not only are you doing that serialization layer,
you're also incurring a bunch of GC
because it's trying to preemptively run around and look for cycles
that might have been forming.
Right. Well, one thing you can do is make the code
so that you don't have as many cycles.
And we actually do that.
We've had people post issues related to this.
So I said I don't know much about GC.
I do know that if you can reduce reference cycles,
you will have less of these asynchronous GC runs happening.
So we had someone specifically came to me with a whole lot of use cases where he showed,
when you run this little code, like all these GCs would happen.
And we went in there and got rid of a lot of cycles.
So we actually have a test suite in test/aa profiling,
test man usage called cycle test, something like that.
And they're all these little whiz bangs that run like,
make a session and close it, do this and that, do this and that, and then it will
runs it in a harness that actually counting what GC is doing.
And it's asserting that there's only like five GC calls and not 20.
Right, yeah, that's fantastic.
We have a lot of that happening.
Yeah, it's cool that you're thinking about it. I mean,
on one hand, this is an external thing. So you can control your data structures,
but you can't totally control what people set their GC to do. But
anyway, it's just something that I always think about when
when you're creating lots of these ORM things,
because a lot of the signals to the GC are like,
"Oh, I got to get busy."
But you're not even...
That's a single call to SQLAlchemy,
and I'm just waiting.
There's nothing else I can do to get out of the way.
You know what I mean?
We've just been around for so many years,
and people have come to us.
We have all kinds of mem usage
and C-profile stuff in our test suite
to make sure the call counts don't grow here,
to make sure we don't do too many GCs.
We try to work on that as much as we can.
Yeah, cool.
ongoing. So I would say one of the things that makes me more excited than most of the other stuff here is probably the
async support that you have going on. That's, you want to talk a bit about, about that? Yeah. So when I was doing 2.0, I
thought, I wanted to be kind of compatible with how asyncio works. And because I figured I would eventually do an
an asyncio API for it.
But then I suddenly had this idea.
Why don't we just do the asyncio thing and we use it?
We do it doing this.
We use this library called Greenlit.
OK, yeah.
Can we can we just take a quick quick break 'cause I have I
one second? Yeah, sure, no problem.
I'm just talking every second be right back.
Thanks everyone out there in the audience for all the good questions. I'm going to have
to run some of those GC examples and count it. I ask that because over on Talk Python
training here have as you imagine sitemap dot XML is all the sitemap stuff
but tons and tons of stuff you see how big that scroll bar is it's massive when
we were loading that page we were getting 77 garbage collection cycles
yeah we had to change the GC stuff and we got it down to two and it made the
the speed of the site so much better.
Now we're not using SQLAlchemy,
we're using MongoEngine and MongoDBs,
but the principle is identical, so it's interesting.
But still, I gotta check into it for SQLAlchemy.
Pretty interesting stuff.
Thanks, John, really glad.
Yeah, Mike has some fantastic insight there, for sure.
- We're back, sorry about that.
- And we're back, no worries.
I was just sort of riffing on some stuff,
some follow up stuff there.
All right, so async.
Where's a good example that I could pull up on the website
to show like using a query?
- There should be an async I/O.
Okay, in ORM examples.
- Yeah, that's exactly.
- Yeah.
- Let's see.
ORM examples, okay.
- You were just there a minute ago.
- Yeah, I'm there, I'm there.
- Do we have async I/O?
- That's what I was thinking.
Let's see, Jason.
Oh, here you go, async I/O integration.
There we go.
So the way the asyncio works is that SQLAlchemy
has async blocking API.
We call dbAPI execute, it blocks, it comes back.
Usually the way you want to make that kind of thing work
in an async non-blocking context is you have to throw
all the stuff into a thread pool.
You probably don't want to be in the wiki,
'cause that's more old stuff.
- Okay.
- Yeah, like that one.
Click on async ORM at the top, that one.
- There we go.
This is the one I was looking for.
- The most basic, yeah.
- This is the one I wanted to show people, yes.
Not the Session one, but the ORM.
- Yeah, this is ORM.
So what's important here is that the notion that we,
2.0 style has a thing where there's a very specific place
that execute happens.
Because with the query object that,
like, you know, SQL query session.query,
you could say query.all, query.one, query.first.
I didn't want to have all this await this, await that,
await everything.
With the new API, it's just, which is really the old API,
it's await execute.
And then you get your result back
and then the result is buffered.
And the way this works that changed
the whole asyncio equation for SQLAlchemy
is that this is not a rewrite of anything.
This is a layer on top of the completely blocking API stuff
and it does not use threads.
It uses Greenlet.
When I went to look at what Greenlet actually does,
A greenlet is compared to a thread,
but it's kind of not like, it's like a thread,
but when you see what it is,
it doesn't really feel like a thread
because it's like, it's a little thing with code
that you can context switch somewhere else.
- It's more like generators than it is like threads.
Like the weirdness of generators skipping around, yeah.
- Exactly.
So the way Python asyncIO has that await key,
where the await is your context switch in asyncIO.
Now, I wanted the internals of SQLAlchemy
to work in this context switching way,
but to integrate with Await.
So we basically made a greenlit wrapper
that emulates Await without actually using Await.
So you're able to take SQL means blocking internals,
which ultimately go out to,
when you use SQL to be async I/O,
you're gonna use a DP API.
Actually, it's not DP, it's a database driver
that is itself also async I/O.
Currently, you're gonna call async PG,
There's an AO SQLite, there's an AsyncMy,
and also there's one, oh, I can't remember the name of it.
Wait, I can't remember the name.
Trying to get Daniel to,
PsychoPG3.
I was teasing Daniel 'cause he's on there.
There's gonna be a PsychoPG3 that we're also gonna support
that does AsyncIO for Postgres.
So you have the AsyncIO driver,
SQLAlchemy then adapts the AWait calls
into its synchronous thing using the green lit thing.
And then on the outside, where you see on the screen there,
is you have asyncio stuff.
And when I actually talked to some of the people
that were involved with asyncio in Python,
they explained to me, you could do it the other way too.
You can have a synchronous API that calls into an async
middle that goes back out to async API.
And that's actually kind of easier to do.
But since SQLAlchemy was already written
in sync blocking style, we kept it that way.
- Right, it's a lot easier to wrap an async shell
on something that's 15 years old and polished,
all the way through, right?
And then it's just like,
we're gonna do the inside all over again.
- Yeah, and the thing with Async is that
there were some SQLAlchemy-based things on GitHub
and whatever that were basically taking our engine
and connection and rewriting them
as totally brand new AsyncIO things.
And I always thought, I'm like,
that's not, you can't maintain that.
It's like you're taking our code,
taking about 30% of what it actually does,
and putting it up and I was like, that can't work.
There's gotta be a way to get green.
'Cause I had used G event and eventlet a lot.
And I'm like, okay, I know Python can do this.
I know it can context switch without using a way.
I know it can do it.
I just had to go in greenlet and read the docs.
And I did that.
- Yeah, that's really cool.
I'm super excited to see this because it opens up
using SQLAlchemy with some of the other frameworks
that really leverage it.
For example, FastAPI,
but there's plenty of others as well, right?
Yeah. Another cool thing about async.io was that when I did the SQL HTML 1.4,
which introduces this new query ORM interface, but keeps the old one,
which is not going to go away because there's just too much code in the old query interface.
But for async.io, it's totally brand new Greenfield development.
So I said, with async.io, you've got to use our new API.
That automatically got a lot of people to be testing the new way of working and got us to get people...
Because one thing that makes libraries really good
is when a lot of people use them
and find problems with them and add use cases
and the library becomes a chore.
So the async I/O thing has been enormously helpful
to bring a lot of people to SQLAlchemy
who would not have been there.
A lot of people who were probably
gonna leave SQLAlchemy stayed.
And people using the 2.0 thing--
- SQL model probably wouldn't have been based on SQLAlchemy.
- Not at all.
Yeah, exactly.
- Because obviously, Sebastian needs that
to integrate with FastAPI and async is a core element there.
Our audience, Daniel says,
"I wonder if other drivers are moving to expose native async interfaces themselves.
Time to go back to DbSig."
Yeah, that's the database special interest group.
Yeah.
Sure, Daniel can go there.
I've not had much success when I go to the SIG to suggest things.
Yeah. Let me talk about this async API a little bit for folks
who are probably familiar with the SQL alchemies traditional API,
because there's a couple of things that stand out to me here.
One is, let's start simple here.
One is you have this concept of creating a select statement
and then executing the statement as opposed to like,
a query of a dot filter.
So there's this sort of this statement model
that you build up. You want to speak about that?
The original, the SQLAlchemy with query
really is 95% the same statement model.
It's just the statement has the fetcher, the getter,
the result fetching method stuck on it.
Yeah.
And, you know, when query came out, that was kind of a historical thing.
The original idea of SQLAlchemy was that there was only going to be the select object
and then you would use select object with the session to get results.
And then it wasn't really done very well,
and it wasn't very flexible.
So people were coming to me with,
well, why don't we use generative builder thing?
And that's kind of what happened,
'cause I wasn't really,
I was a little bit rudderless in those days.
So we had query, and it took me quite a long time
to realize, wait a second, query is basically,
once query got much more fancy,
it started out as very simplistic,
I only keep query for one object, and do this and that.
As I had to keep adding to it,
it became clear that I was rebuilding select.
that they met in the middle.
- Yeah, that like, I'm just rebuilding select
in exactly the same, but slightly different way.
And that bothered me for years.
So with 2.0, I finally took that on
and did a really, really long, difficult refactoring
to take all of the guts of ORM query
and put it into a different module called context
that you don't deal with.
And when you get the select object you see there,
that indicates the exact same intent
as query a options filter.
And they both go to the same backend
that does all the ORM, figure it out stuff
that's a little more elaborate
to come up with the SQL that will be sent to the database.
- Yeah.
- One of the biggest refactoring I've ever done
and it was quite stressful
when it seemed like I was hitting dead ends
is oh, this is not gonna work.
- Yeah, I can imagine.
- Yeah.
- This is cool.
So basically the query of class dot, that style is going away, right?
It's never going to go away because there's so much code in that style that it's basically
not when you go to the website, it's not going to be in the tutorial, it's going to, it'll
be in reference docs.
So people that deal with that code can deal with it.
It'd be in some sort of middle ground where it's not fully deprecated, but it's not promoted
either.
It's just called, it's called legacy.
We've had different systems that stay in legacy for many years.
Sure.
Makes sense.
And where are you?
in that way, I totally agree.
- Yeah, I probably would never take it out.
But what I did do is when I do that,
I try to make that code written such that
it's all by itself.
And it basically, what query does now
is it makes that select inside.
It sends it off.
So it's what you call eating your own dog food.
It means that the alternate API
uses the real API internally,
so you're testing it either way.
- Right, going back to our patterns talk,
it's like an adapter for the select pattern.
- Yeah, okay, API. - Yeah.
- Two other things that stand out here.
One is you create a session maker traditionally
and you create a session by calling it.
Here you have an async session maker, right?
To create them. - Yep.
- That's one of the differences.
That's not super different,
but the other one that is interesting to me
is now these things are context managers.
- Yeah.
- When I used to work with SQLAlchemy,
traditional ones,
I would create a class called a session context
just so I could do this in a with statement.
And here, obviously, it's an async with statement,
but that's just the async aspect of it.
- It's in the sync aspect too.
I should mention that when SQLAlchemy,
in 2006, we were in Python 2.3,
there were not context managers.
They didn't come out until Python 2.5.
- Right, so you can't integrate with them
if they don't exist in your API.
- So I didn't, so nothing was based on that.
So SQLAlchemy 1.4 and 2.0, as much as possible,
completely support the Context Manager model.
And the docs and the tutorials, if you look at the new 1.4 tutorial
that's on the site, it's all about Context Managers,
and all the try, except writing your own thing should go away.
You should use Context Managers now.
And what you see there with the Async pattern,
I've made it so that if you're using all the new APIs,
the context manager pattern with the engine and connection in core
is mirrored to the context manager pattern with the session
and the session maker.
And then it's also mirrored in the async I/O API.
So there's four different APIs.
There's core and ORM, sync and async.
And they all should have, as much as they can,
the same-- see the hands, this means code.
They have the same--
as much as possible, they should have the same context manager patterns.
And we want you to use context managers for everything now,
for any kind of blocking of...
And that's also how we can improve the transactional model
so that you're really working the transaction all the time with the core
because it's not a burden because you have context managers.
Yeah, so one of the things I see, I want to ask you about two bits of code
and then take another question from the audience.
So you have a with session.begin,
and you do some inserts,
and then you don't say session.commit.
So the way this works, I'm presuming, tell me if I'm understanding this right,
if it makes it through the with block without an error, it commits.
If it makes it through the with block with an exception,
it just doesn't commit and effectively rolls it back.
It doesn't roll back. Yeah.
Beautiful.
That's correct. And we've had the begin content manager for a long time.
It's just it wasn't totally consistent everywhere.
But we've had that for a long time.
And yeah, but now I've made sure that all the opening
and closing of resource and the begin commit of resource
are consistent and also there's always a way
that you can open the resource and begin commit
in one line of code also.
The session maker has a begin on it now.
You can do that.
Yeah.
- The other thing I'm super familiar with execute.
- Yep.
- But then you also have stream, which looks real similar.
What's the difference there?
Stream is async I/O only right now.
Stream is because it's important in many cases
to get a result that's doing async streaming.
And when you're doing async streaming with async I/O,
you've got to have the await keyword.
So you can see the result object returned
from session.stream is called an async result.
And all of the methods have the async annotation on them
so that you see it's async for A in result.scalars.
- Oh, I see.
So the things you interact with,
the subsequent functions are themselves all async as well.
- Yeah, and what that will do is that will try
to use a server-side cursor.
- Yeah, yeah, that's what I imagined.
That's cool, yeah.
Instead of trying to pull it all into memory,
if you got a thousand rows back,
you could start pulling them more generator.
- Right, when you use a server-side cursor,
you actually are genuinely not pulling everything
into memory first.
When you use the buffered result,
you're getting everything into memory at once.
Which is normally okay for smaller.
- Yeah, most of the time it's fine.
but if you want a whole bunch or you're flowing it on word.
Yeah, anyway, a lot of cool stuff there.
So I think we'll get short on time.
Mr. Hypermagnetic out there asked,
does CWOC support paginated results?
That also leads us towards a little area I wanna focus on
just a couple of things as well.
So yeah, maybe address that first.
- Paginated results is kind of one of those things
that seems simple, but it's more of a quagmire
than you might expect.
There's different ways to do paginated results.
The way we all did it years ago was we used these functions
in SQL called limit and offset,
where limit will give you like 10 rows at a time
and offset will start your results set in the middle.
Once we work with bigger database,
we all realized that offset is terrible
because offset will actually get the whole results set
and scroll through it.
It does it on the server side, but it's still very slow.
So nowadays when you do pagination,
you want to have some kind of approach
where the query you're doing is looking at some data in the data,
some row in the data, some column in the data you're querying.
So like if you're paginating by date,
page 10 would be where date is greater than this date
that you know from the previous page you just got.
That's one way.
Another way is to write SQL query that do this thing called window functions
where you can kind of figure out all the date or whatever thing ahead of time.
Pagination implies, of that approach, implies that you have, actually of any approach, implies that you have an order by something.
So it's hard to make pagination be like this, like this result here, result.scalars to say .paginate.
That's not really, I mean, you can make a very crappy version that does that, but it's not really, it wouldn't really work that way.
There is, I should say, there is a method in the result called partitions that will
give you chunks of a result at a time.
It's not quite the same as pagination because pagination is stateless.
It's usually for web applications where you're going to get a certain page of a result and
then show them a web page and then your whole SQL is over.
And then you're going to come back to that SQL later.
So we have features built in for partitioning of a single result set so that you get chunks
for that time, which is helpful.
Pagination is something you need to go and look.
There's some, I think maybe SQL Utils
probably has some helper functions for that.
We have some recipes in that wiki page
that I told you to leave.
There's actually some recipes for pagination there.
I don't think pagination is like a turnkey.
It's gotta be kind of customized
and people will write pagination frameworks
and they're complicated and they're hard to do.
So we leave those as an exercise for the community to do.
But we do have some recipes for that.
Yeah.
- Yeah, thanks.
That's a great answer.
Okay, now for the last thing,
I wanted to talk really quickly about this list
from Dalia called Awesome SQLAlchemy.
It's one of these awesome lists
that covers all these SQLAlchemy things
like data structures and types.
And I'm just throwing this at you
and neither of us have a ton of experience
with a lot of these things,
but I thought it'd be fun to just kind of go through them,
some of the nice or interesting things that I've read across the air.
So as a way to kind of wrap this up, like some extras, all right?
So one of them is SQLAlchemy Continuum,
a versioning extension for SQLAlchemy.
Yeah.
It's probably based on one of the recipes that we have
in the source distribution, probably.
Versioning, yeah, it says the first line of SQLAlchemy
already has a versioning extension.
The extension is very limited.
That's correct.
Everything he wrote there,
everything they wrote there is correct.
I had had some jobs in the banking industry
where I was doing SQLAlchemy
and we had some need to version rows and data.
- I need to know exactly audit this
and when has it changed and how do I go back.
- Yeah, they need, yeah.
- All that kind of stuff, right.
- Yeah, there's different models.
You can either take the rows as you get them
and put them in an archive table,
or you can do this thing where you never update
or delete a row, you just insert a new row.
And you've got kind of a temporal version scheme.
I have some recipes to do that in the example section
'cause I did them at a job.
And I believe Continuum builds upon those
to make a more robust, well-supported thing.
I don't know, I've heard of Liquibase.
I don't know.
- Yeah, this is out of my world.
I'm not a Java person either, sorry, but yeah.
- Maybe, it might be like that, yeah.
- All right, here's another one
that I ran across from that SQLAlchemy awesome list
is SQLAlchemy enum 3.4,
I'm guessing because it came from Python 3.4.
This package provides SQLAlchemy type to store
as a standard enum.enums.
'Cause a lot of times what happens is those things
get turned into like numbers or other weird things.
And here they get a little more type information, right?
- Yeah, this might be absolutely,
'cause we do support regular Python enums in our enum type.
We didn't at first.
- Yeah, this is looking like it's,
well, seven months ago.
- Well, you know, if someone's using this,
they could stay, 'cause there are some enum features.
I've been notified that we don't do exactly the way.
There's some extra features that I forgot what they were,
but there are some things that enums do
that we don't support.
So maybe this probably--
- Maybe it adds that on, yeah.
- Does that better, yeah.
Enums are really a pain in the butt.
The data types.
- I know, I know.
All right.
- The Python side's good, but the database side is,
Yeah, it's always some sort of hack.
Alembic, I mean, that's pretty well known to people,
but that's obviously important
because you've got to keep your database and your models
pretty closely in sync, right?
- Yeah, so we maintain Alembic.
I wrote Alembic years ago as SQLAlchemy Migrate
was kind of not really holding up to what we were doing.
SQLAlchemy Migrate is part of OpenStack now,
and I actually have maintained that a little bit as well,
but Alembic was meant to be more of a bare bones,
straightforward, not too fancy tool.
It has become fancier.
And people that use it and get what it's about,
like it a lot.
It's never gonna be as cool as South for Django.
I mean, maybe in Alembic 3, you know,
but I don't, that could happen.
It's not as automated as everybody would like.
It has a system that it will look at your models,
it'll look at the database
and what we call auto-generate your migrations.
But we don't guarantee those migrations
are completely perfect.
You've got to go and look at them and fix them.
Which I still think it just did 95% of the typing for you,
you know, of the work for you.
That's what it was meant to do.
- Yeah.
- So I think it's very, very solid.
- I think also it's helpful because it works in that realm
of that's the area of SQL.
I know less well, the DDL and that drop.
How do I drop a table or a column and then re-add it under a different name without losing data?
All that kind of stuff can be tricky.
Yeah, and DDL is where a lot of the database vendor specific stuff is exposed.
Like all these crazy keywords and data types and it's less declarative and more imperative.
And so for Alembic, we just provide a model to create your migrations
that has been working pretty well. It's got a lot of features now.
But it's again a tool where if you don't know what DDL is,
you're going to have a bad time with Alembic.
You should learn what database migrations look like in the alter table,
alter column and kind of know what that means.
And then Alembic will be pretty smooth.
And there actually are extensions for this.
I saw it wasn't on that list.
There's an extension called Alembic Utils,
which are extensions for Alembic for Postgres
that also build upon some recipes that are in these docs here.
and I recommend looking at that too.
- Cool.
All right, there's a couple we can go quick on.
There's one for talking to Amazon Redshift as a provider.
That's pretty cool.
- Yeah.
- There's FormAlchemy, which--
- Is it still maintained?
This is an old one.
FormAlchemy is, you see, 12 years ago.
- Oh yeah.
- It's old.
- It's old, maybe it still works,
but let's leave that one alone.
- It probably still works.
It looks--
- Yeah, probably.
- Yeah.
- HTML hasn't changed since then,
just style some CSS on it.
All right, GeoAlchemy is pretty popular
for people doing geospatial work.
- Yep, so there's GeoAlchemy and there's GeoAlchemy 2.
I'm not sure of the relationship,
which one is which, who works on which one.
GeoAlchemy seems like it might have,
it might not, I'm not sure how much it's maintained.
I think it's maintained.
I would like it to be much more well-maintained.
I think it supports, it's pretty Postgres-centric,
but there are Geo things for SQL Server and Oracle
and my SQL, I would like to see that stuff supported as well.
GUAlchemy, I don't hear much about it,
but I think it's a good project.
- Yeah, cool.
One for some growth, perhaps.
- Yeah.
- SQLTAP, a SQL profiling and introspection
for applications using SQLAlchemy.
- Wow, cool. - Have you seen this?
- Probably not.
- I have not seen this either.
- So when you do a request, I think what it's doing,
it stores what the page did.
So it says here, there's 12 queries.
It would spend like 20 milliseconds.
And then you click on each one and it'll show you
the select statements and like the actual SQL.
- So it's probably profiling from the client side.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, I think so.
Yeah, I think so.
- That's nice.
That's yeah, 'cause you can, if you're just timing it,
yeah, that's cool.
I wonder if it does things like explain.
- Yeah, I don't totally know,
but it looks like it has a whiskey integration,
which is cool.
- Yep, cool.
- This is another one related sort of that helps.
It's called N plus one.
- Oh yeah.
- Your N plus one.
- That's cool.
- Yeah, is a problem that many ORMs run into
when people don't realize they're doing lazy loading
and they don't do a join.
And it can be super indirect.
Like here, I got a query of a list
and I sent the list off to the HTML template
and the HTML template did a loop
and talked about some property on the thing.
and then there's more, a bunch of more database queries
or something crazy, right?
- Yeah, interesting that it seems to work
for multiple lower ends.
- Yeah, SQLAlchemy, Pui, Django.
- It's streaming, maybe just taps into the APIs
of all those different tools.
- Yeah, probably someone's added a layer for each.
- Yeah, I guess you could do it
in a kind of a distant way, heuristically.
If you want to see the same query
to the same table over and over again,
maybe that's what it's looking for.
- Yeah.
- Where I could do that
looking at SQL saying lazy logo called.
If you just look at the SQL, there's probably ways to do it,
but that's kind of an intricate problem.
But that seems like a really useful tool if it works.
- Yeah, yeah, it does.
And also I saw in there, we'll just close out with this.
I saw in there they mentioned the Pyramid debug toolbar,
the Flask debug toolbar, and the Django debug toolbar.
And I can't speak to Django.
I don't think I've even run the Flask one,
but the Pyramid one has a, like you can open it up
and say what were the SQLAlchemy queries of this page?
and actually see how many queries.
If you're on a page and it says,
look, there's 51 queries,
you're like, I thought I did one,
what just happened?
How'd I get 51?
I'm like, well, you got 50 elements
in an in-plus line.
- Yeah, the debug tool,
I haven't really worked with it,
but yeah, we have a lot of people
dealing with it or we have to fix issues with it.
I don't actually write any web applications anymore.
I just do this.
So I don't get to see that stuff.
- Awesome.
Now, really cool.
I also don't use them very much anymore either.
I don't need that support as much as I did in the early days,
but I do remember them being quite valuable.
- Yeah.
- All right, Mike.
Well, there's more stuff we can go into,
but what a cool conversation.
And thank you so much for releasing the 2.0 stuff,
for adding the async support.
It really opens up a lot more use cases.
- Yeah.
- I think that are going to be interesting for people.
So, man, it's fantastic.
- Yeah, my pleasure.
The async worked out really well.
I'm really happy about that.
- Yeah, great.
Now, before you get out of here,
Let me ask you the final two questions.
You kind of alluded to this already.
If you're gonna write some code,
what Python editor do you use?
- I'm on VS Code right now.
I was on Sublime for a long time.
Years ago I used TextMate.
I do use VI and Vim a lot,
but if I have like lots of windows open,
it's gonna, right now it's VS Code.
- Yeah, fantastic.
Then notable PyPI package, anything come to mind?
I mean, we kind of threw out a whole bunch, probably.
- Did I put anything?
- No. - Click to the item pointing down.
(laughing)
- I'll put your favorite in the list that I threw up there for you.
Tell me like, the awesome ones.
Which one stood out the most to you?
- Oh, that N+1 thing looks really interesting.
- All right, awesome. So N+1 with the plus spelled out.
And the one also spelled out. - Yeah.
- Yeah, very good.
All right, well, final call to action.
People have a bunch of SQLAlchemy code that they've written,
but it's probably for the older style.
It's probably not async and so on. What do you tell them?
We have a brand new tutorial on the current website.
If you go to docs.sqlacademy.org, on the left side, it'll have this 1.4/2.0 tutorial
that kind of represents SQLAlchemy all over again, using all the newest concepts.
I would look at that and just get to know it and also point out problems.
Yeah, this is a new tutorial, so this supersedes the old tutorials.
and it's going to talk about Core and ORM at the same time.
So this is a complete brand new rewrite from the ground up.
It took many weeks to do it.
And then there's also the migration guide.
But if you go through this tutorial,
you really see what the new way of working is supposed to look like
and what the idea is, what it's supposed to be.
If you look at it, if you read the tutorial
and assume you don't have any SQL Academy code,
assume you're just learning it from scratch,
you know, see what it's like, see, wow, wow, this is different.
Or you might see, "Oh, I never knew that was like that."
Because it really tries to represent the library
from the first principles, so to speak,
up to the ORM stuff.
Yeah, fantastic.
All right, well, I'm excited about all these new features,
even the embracing of context managers everywhere.
It looks great to me.
Thanks for being here and thanks for sharing this with everyone.
Yeah, my pleasure.
You bet. Bye.